This week on Bold Names, we're talking
to Bob Jordan. He's the CEO of Southwest
Airlines. The company is going through a
lot of changes, and assigned seating is
just part of that. We get into that and
much more. So, fasten your seatbelts,
put your tray table up cuz we're taking
off.
>> [music]
>> Bob Jordan, thank you for joining us
here on Bold Names today.
Really excited to hear about all the
changes at Southwest. And when I think
of Southwest, I think of a few things.
Super friendly people, uh cheap fares,
uh free checked baggage, and open
seating. Now, we've seen some changes.
Some of those things have gone away,
most notably in the last month or so,
you have uh gone to a model where you're
assigning seats to people. How has that
very big change uh gone for you at this
point? I mean, I remember it used to be
like church, you could sit anywhere.
Well, uh
you know,
we're driven by the customer. This is
all about pursuing what the customer
wants. Herb our founder always said if
you don't change, if you don't follow
the customer, you die. And
80% of our customers wanted assigned
seating. We put together the the most
transformational set of initiatives this
company has ever seen. It's really a
change to the business model. Uh again,
with our our product, you know, we added
extra legroom, kind of a pseudo premium.
We added uh a different boarding. We
added assigned seating. We've added all
kinds of partners. We can now connects
you to uh
you know, every geography in the world
at this point. So, a a lot of
fundamental changes. But at the end of
the day, it's all about number one, what
our customers want, and number two, not
losing our values. Our values are not
going to change. And this company is
from the very start based on great
people delivering exceptional
hospitality, and that is still the very
center of the brand promise.
And I want to get into some of those
changes here, but let's talk let's get
into the the seat issue. Because for
those people who don't remember, who
don't who aren't regulars, it used to be
there was like a process, right? You
like 24 hours beforehand, you wanted to
get onto the app to make sure you could
get your group to get in line, and there
was a whole theory and strategy of so
you maybe could figure out to get an
aisle seat or a window seat. Now, that's
gone. Now, it's just like you get your
assigned seat when you buy your ticket,
right? You do. And you know, what what
we heard from folks was they loved the
simplicity of open seating, what you
just described, but they hated the
stress of not knowing where they were
going to sit, especially if you're a
family. You you can't guarantee that
you're next to the person you're
traveling with. You can't guarantee that
as a family you're sitting together.
So, um
folks want to know where they are on the
aircraft. And today, you you make a
booking and you can know, obviously, at
that time. We also gave you a lot of
choice. We have an extra legroom
section. It's got an elevated snack
service.
And uh and it's really a great product.
The implementation overall was just
flawless. So, you mean, you think about
it, overnight, we changed two of the
most fundamental things about how you
operate the airline, how we seat
customers, how we board customers. So,
we went to bed one day
using an open seating and woke up the
next day in assigned seating. So, it's a
huge change. And by the way, on the day
that we implemented assigned seating, we
led Delta, American, and United in
on-time performance and cancellation
rate. So, I'm really proud of our our
company. But it's never perfect. You
know, with a a change that large, you're
going to have tweaks. What I love is
that the system was designed to be able
to do those things very quickly. You
know, I think the question you've got
you're paying for checked bags now. Uh
there are these extra kind of add-ons
for whether more legroom or there's
basic economy fares. There's all these
kind of tiering, which sounds like uh
what a traditional airline is like. And
some of those Southwest fans are saying,
"Hey, what's the difference now between
the other guys and Southwest?" How does
that make you feel? I mean, you you've
been at the company probably almost 40
years, right? You probably That that
sounds like maybe that might sting a
little.
Change is hard. What we do know, this is
what our customers wanted. They want
choice. They want they want more choice
from the very basic fare to a fare that
includes basically everything from top
to bottom. And
uh
on the bag on on the checked bag fee,
all you have to do is have the Southwest
Airlines credit card. And you're going
to accrue more miles, you're going to
have a free checked bag. Uh you're going
to be guaranteed uh a better boarding
group. But it's because that's what our
customer wants. It's about all, you
know, it's all about pursuing our
customers. But to your what's different
now, you know, you're you're becoming
more and more like every airline.
Um it it's funny, over my tenure here,
38 years, every we have we have
customers who are incredibly loyal to
the brand. It's an emotional connection
to the brand. So, you change something,
and that's going to upset somebody. I
remember going through We used to have
plastic boarding cards. You you
you had a plastic boarding card, you got
in line, and the gate agent took this
piece of plastic from you, and that's
how you got on the airplane. And when we
changed that, you know, we had folks
say, "Well, there goes the soul of the
airline. No more plastic boarding." We
used to serve peanuts. Obviously, some
folks had peanut allergies. And we
changed that to pretzels, and oh, there
goes the soul of the airline. So, you've
got to be really clear about what is
essential,
and what are what are what do we stand
for, and then what what are just things
that are attributes to the product. So,
what has always been true for Southwest
is not changing. We have the best
domestic network. We have the best
hospitality. We have the most rewarding
loyalty program. We have incredible
loyal customers. And the centerpiece of
all that is we have the best people, and
not just in the airline business, in any
hospitality business. We hire folks that
that are low ego, and they love to serve
our customers. And that's what is not
changing. That is the that is the
essential
promise of Southwest Airlines. When Herb
founded this place,
he looked at the industry
in the '70s in the late '60s and '70s
and went, "It's high fare,
it the reliability is no good, and it is
no fun to fly."
And that's what he set out to fix. Let's
let's lower costs, lower fares, so you
can democratize the skies, and anybody
can fly. Let's make uh this industry
Let's make this airline highly reliable,
and let's bring some fun to to some some
joy to the journey.
And we have great fares. We we are the
most reliable airline. We won the Wall
Street Journal Best US Airline in 2025,
I'm very proud to report. In the midst
of
>> top That's a top publication. If they
say it, it's true. In the midst of all
of these changes, too.
And uh we were able to do that. And the
heart and soul of the airline, our
people, hospitality, and fun is still
what we stand on. You know, I think the
criticism um against you personally and
Southwest had been that you'd been too
slow to make changes, right? And you go
back to 2024,
you had an activist investor who took a
position. Right.
>> He's really pushing for a lot of
changes, Elliott Investment Management.
Uh there was even a push to get rid of
you.
Painful time, I imagine. Stressful time.
But I'm curious how that changed you as
a CEO and how you think about leading
the company.
You know, I don't know that that changed
my view at all.
Because you look at that period, and
yeah, it there was uh
you know, the company needs to be fast
There was there was a lot of criticism
of Southwest Airlines. Some, you know, I
think deserved, at least the probably uh
the the pace. We're not moving fast
enough.
But yeah, they're calling to get rid of
me, make changes to the board.
But but you start with what is the best
for Southwest Airlines. What is the best
for our people? What's the best for our
customer? You can't start with what is
best for Bob. I love this place.
And I'm never going to start with what's
good for me. I'm going to start with
what is good for Southwest Airlines.
Um
so, you just ignore all that, and you go
to work uh
changing the company, driving the
transformation,
uh meeting the customers' needs,
improving the value proposition for our
shareholders.
So, you know, I look at that period
actually as I think we'll look back and
and
uh and decide that that's one of the
best things that happened to Southwest.
And what I mean by that is while Elliott
didn't bring anything new, no new idea,
what Elliott brought was
you know, kind of a kick in the pants to
move faster. A sense of urgency. A sense
of urgency, a sense of of making the you
know, driving the company to be more
agile. And so, you look back and we
accomplished more in the last year
that I've seen not just Southwest, but
any airline do in a year's period. You
look up today, we're forecasting
earnings this year that are over four
times 2025.
And I I definitely want to I want to get
into those earnings. I'm curious,
though, it it feels like
you're a little bit of a catch-22,
right? You're a guy who spent the the
bulk of your adult life at Southwest.
You
uh you inherited this great heritage
um
from your founder, who a key part of his
philosophy was doing things differently.
And you're getting pressure from Elliott
to do things similar to what other
airlines are doing. Did you Do you think
that outside pressure, that outside
force really helped you? I I think it's
subtle. So, I I think everything that we
have done was in the plan.
So, we we had had an investor day
planned right uh
well before Elliott, and we had changes
like assigned seating already well
underway, the addition of extra legroom
already well underway.
So, I I I give them credit for the kick
in the pants, the urgency. Yeah. But,
the plan was already the plan. We knew
we knew what we needed to change to A
meet the needs of our customers and B
improve the value proposition for our
shareholders.
You look at something like like like
bags fly free and charging for bags.
Um that's a billion-dollar
uh benefit
I
from the top line, which ultimately
benefits our shareholders. You're
generating an an extra billion dollars a
year. That's right. So, you you have to
take a hard
black and white look at that and say
if we must have industry-leading
returns, cuz at the end of the day we
are a for-profit company owned by our
shareholders,
then
if I'm going to have a bags fly free
policy, which of course everybody likes,
bags fly free, who's going to vote
against that, then I
>> to fly free. That'd be a good policy,
too. Well, of course. If you ask
somebody what would you like to pay,
what are they going to say? Zero.
So, if so
what you can't do is ignore that fact.
So, in other words, you either have
another billion-dollar idea
that you can execute, or you're going to
accept the fact that you're going to
have very underwhelming financial
performance relative to your peers. So
much
about Southwest that people just have
paid attention to in the last 50 years,
right? And a lot of a lot of discussion
about the unique corporate culture,
how you do things differently, how do
you bottle that. And I think kind of go
back to the earlier part of this
conversation, when you start to make
tweaks to things, it's oh, the soul of
the company is lost, right?
As a as a leader, I'm curious how you
think about that, because in some ways
I almost wonder if it's conflating brand
attributes, right? Open seating, free
checked bags, those are things that are
part of the brand, but they that's not
corporate culture in the sense of how
you operate as a company. How do you how
do you think about and how do you hang
on to what you believe is the corporate
culture, even though you're clearly
you're making changes because you think
the business needs to adapt? You know,
it's funny. All the time I'm asked to
give you know, folks want a really
complex
formula for our culture.
And I put it in two really simple terms.
Number one, we seek to hire the right
person. And for me, that is is humble
and low ego.
Somebody that'll fit Southwest Airlines.
And then number two,
we seek to find somebody who will put
the needs of others before the needs of
themselves. Whether that's another
employee or a customer. Colleen Barrett,
you know, our former president, uh
always said
the core of this airline is the golden
rule.
And the golden rule is one of our
values. I talked to a lot of business
leaders and there's this
there's always this kind of
desire to keep the culture or to change
the culture or make the culture go
faster.
And it
sometimes a lot of those culture
discussions,
those conversations about culture get
thrown out the door when the business
isn't challenged or investors are out
there unhappy. It's the the thing that's
easy to get forgotten about when you're
trying to make your quarterly numbers.
You know, what that means it's not real.
A value a value is or a value isn't.
You know, that your values are your
foundation.
And if they go out the window when
you're under stress, whether that's
financial stress, an activist, whatever
it is, then it's not your value. You
know, your value your values are
revealed when the times get tough.
And
so we got into COVID
and
the first discussions
of course were
how do we save this business?
But, then second discussion was how do
we take care of our people? How do we
keep them safe? How how do we make sure
that they know that they're loved and
cared for despite what's going on. How
do we keep them from being scared? How
do we keep keep them informed?
Um
so again, if the value's real,
then it has to show up.
I I wonder about kind of the results
you're you're seeing internally. Um
You know, here at the journal we've
heard from a lot of people who say
they're Southwest diehards and now
they're abandoning the airline cuz of
these changes. You go on TikTok. I spent
the night on TikTok last night just
scrolling through all of the dooms the
doom sayers who are very unhappy. And I
will say there were some people who were
happy with the changes, so just to be
fair there. But,
you know, when change happens, people
let you know about it. We talked about
that earlier. I wonder if you're seeing
that any of that in the bookings. Are
are people literally giving up or is it
are you still winning over people? No,
you got to be careful always to in terms
of what we report around, you know,
non-public information, but two things.
Uh no, business is strong. We've been
very very open about that. And then
number two, we watch
uh customer data every single day. Of
course, we're seeing
um
feedback, because change is hard. Right.
>> seeing any evidence that folks are
booking away from Southwest. We're
seeing a lot of enthusiasm for the
changes.
And we're seeing the changes that we're
making to tweak things like boarding and
the bin space, we're seeing that very
effective. And you always have I'm not
picking on the sources,
but you always have to separate social
media feedback and data.
Mhm.
Because a lot of times
you know, emotional reactions show up
and that's not the same as real
information. But, no, we listen to all
feedback, we're taking action, but no,
there there there there is a lot of
evidence uh that this is what our
customers wanted.
And uh number two, it's working. Yeah.
Uh one of the things that I know is very
important to a lot of people out there
is you can it shows up in polling
information is this idea of
affordability in the US right now.
A lot of people feel like things are not
affordable, whether it's
uh health care or
daily life.
And clearly that's something that's
going to affect you all in in the travel
industry, definitely. Are you worried
that or do you have any concerns or any
thoughts around
these new fees
increased ticket prices that might kind
of spur backlash
among your customers or are you still
you're still the cheapest to go with?
Oh, yeah, we we um
This is a big part of offering our
customers choice. We're we're now
offering you everything from something
that is very premium, extra legroom,
uh uh
sort of everything included down to what
we call the basic fare.
And so, which are very very affordable.
We have terrific sales, terrific fares
at Southwest Airlines. And so, you you
have the choice to buy across a wide
range of of uh products, including
something that's if if if only price is
important to you, we've got something we
offer you.
And we measure every single day
in the marketplace
are we are we low
or lowest or or or matched up? And our
our fares are incredibly affordable. I
mean, that's a value here at Southwest
is being affordable, having low cost
just like high service is. But, no,
we're we're very focused on the fact
that you have customers all across the
map in terms of what they're looking
for. For the the previous year, you
reported about 512 million dollars
adjusted profit, which I'd say is a
fraction of the big bigger places like
Delta and United. But, what you're
talking about is you alluded to earlier,
I mean, you're expecting to quadruple
your earnings this year.
Is that really doable? I mean, that's
that's a huge that's a huge jump, you
know, that's
Well, we yeah, last year our earnings
were 93 cents a share.
And we guided at least $4 a share for
six year.
Uh again, I'd get in a lot of trouble if
I gave you a financial report given that
we're we're mid-quarter. Uh but um
you know,
what we've
what we've continued to say is
everything's on track. Now, um so it's
abs- we wouldn't have guided if it's not
possible. I mean, the the way the levers
you're doing are you as you alluded to
earlier, a billion dollars extra because
of the bag fees. And you're probably
making a lot more money on the the the
more comfortable seats. And those are
the levers you have to pull. And cost.
It's there's a huge cost inefficiency
play here, billion dollars a year run
rate.
>> Mhm. And you have the revenue plays. You
know, the only wild card
uh
of course is fuel. That's the one thing
we do not control or what fuel prices
are going to do. You know,
they're obviously very volatile right
now. Yeah, because of the issues in the
Middle East around
>> the Middle East issues, and we don't
control that, but you know, kind of fuel
aside,
uh the business is doing very well.
Well, one of the things one of the the
big changes you did did away with last
year was you got rid of your fuel
hedging program, which you all were
legendary for so long.
Um do you regret getting out of that?
You know, the the evidence is that we we
we were paying about 150 million a year
in premiums, because hedging because of
the volatility of fuel and oil, hedging
premiums became hedging costs became
very expensive. It was very expensive to
buy a hedge. Cuz the way this works is
you do agree to buy fuel for a fixed
price later on. And the gamble is the
price you're agreeing to is going to be
cheaper in the future cuz prices are
going to go
>> Yeah, basically you're buying a right.
And because of volatility, the cost of
that right increased a lot in the last
decade. So, you just
so it cost a lot more. So, it cost about
150 million. So, before you ever
uh uh
before a dime shows up because of the
hedge, you're in the hole 150 million
bucks. And the evidence across the the
decade is we were spending more in
premium than we were ever getting. One
of the things that made Southwest
successful in the early days was
it wasn't copying what competitors are
doing. But,
you're no longer the upstart, right?
You're They're You guys have been around
for more than 50 years. You're in a lot
of ways a big dog yourself. Um
but I wonder
is what's going to get you to the next
level just copying what everybody else
is doing? Is there something you've got
to do that's Are you you you looking for
something beyond the the levers that
we've already talked about? I mean, how
do you how do you think about creativity
in in a business that is
you know, pretty well defined. There
There's a lot of players out there. It's
brutally competitive.
Yeah, I think of it very simply, which
is yeah, we are the largest domestic
airline.
Uh which is a wonderful thing.
Uh but to some extent, that's a bit
irrelevant in the pursuit of the
customer. Uh because you start with
uh
we whether anybody has done something or
not, that's not the question. And the
question is what do our customers want
from Southwest Airlines? Because if I
cannot offer that to you,
and even if you love me, you you you're
you're in Nashville, you love Southwest
Airlines, but if I can't offer you a
route, a product,
uh a lounge, something that you want,
you're going to go get that from another
airline. We're going to force you to go
buy that from a competitor.
So, I'm focused on
um not copying anybody, but pursuing the
things that our customers want. Because
number one, that expands the customer
base. Number two, it expands the share
of wallet that you're willing to spend
with Southwest Airlines. And number
three, it grows the company.
So, that it's subtle, but that's the
difference versus um well, I see that a
that a competitor is doing this, so I
want to copy them. What I want What I
want to do
is knock off the list all the things
that you, as our
beloved customer, want from Southwest,
and we just cannot provide that to you.
Are your customers wanting transatlantic
flights? Do they want to go to London
and Paris on Southwest? I know you've uh
publicly flirted with the idea that that
might be something you're thinking
about.
We know, of course, that we have
customers who fly long-haul
international, but they're flying that
on somebody else. The good news is
today, you can now buy that through
Southwest on a partner and connect. Some
of those partners are in China, right?
One's in China.
>> We We have China, Europe, uh uh
all over the place. We can get you to
nearly any place in the world at this
point. Uh and we know we have customers
who want an even more premium product,
basically first class.
So,
no no decision, nothing to announce, but
it but but those have to go in the bag
on the list of what you are willing to
consider, because our customers are are
We know we have a set of customers that
are buying that from from from another
carrier. So, the focus right now though
is on
um
finishing up the implementation,
actually optimizing the things that we
just spent a year putting into place. As
you know that we were still making
boarding changes and seating changes,
and so we're tweaking there. If you're
going to pursue the customer, you've got
to be willing to put everything on the
list for consideration. Bob Jordan,
thank you for coming on Bold Names
today. I look forward to seeing you in
the skies.
We are looking forward to welcoming you.
And and and and again, thanks for having
me today. I appreciate it.
>> [music]
[music]